[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Namaste and
welcome to "Thrive,
Self-healing with Ayurveda."
My name is Kishan Shah,
longtime practitioner
of Ayurvedic medicine and
teacher of yoga and meditation.
Ayurveda is the holistic
system of medicine from India.
And in today's
video, we're going
to show you how to make
khichdi, also known as kitchari.
It's a super
cleansing, balancing,
and nourishing recipe that
you can make on a daily basis
or even use as a simple cleanse.
Let's get started.
For this recipe, you will need 1
cup of long grain white basmati
rice, 1 cup of split mung daal--
it's a small yellow bean--
1 medium onion, 1/4 cut
chopped fresh ginger root,
1 teaspoon turmeric powder,
1 teaspoon of cumin seeds,
1 teaspoon of black
mustard seeds, and ghee.
Then will need 4 whole
cloves, 4 fresh curry leaves--
you can get those at
a local Indian grocer,
and if not, don't
worry about it--
pink Himalayan salt, freshly
ground black pepper, Hing,
also known as asafoetida-- you
can also get that an Indian
grocery store--
fresh cilantro, 1
lemon, 2 scallions
are optional if
you like the taste,
1 whole dried red
chili if you wanted
to add a little bit of spice.
All right, so use this
recipe as your base.
And you can add various organic
seasonal vegetables to it
as you like.
Included in the video
page is a basic PDF
I created for you that
you can download and use
as a reference to the recipe,
along with a list of vegetables
that are appropriate
for the doshas, body
types, and seasonal influences.
All right, let's get started.
The first thing
we're going to do
is we're going to
measure out the ghee.
So we're going to need a
tablespoon and a half of ghee.
And I've already added some
in there so it would melt.
And we're going to
put our heat on low.
OK, so it's not too hot
for when we add the spices.
And then once we melt the ghee--
ghee is clarified butter.
Essentially what it is they
take butter, they heat it up,
and it allows all the
excess water to boil off.
And then they're able to
actually filter out and strain
the milk solids.
So what you end up with
is a shelf stable oil.
And as long as you use a
very clean and dry spoon
to measure out your
ghee, you don't even
need to refrigerate it.
OK, so now that my ghee is
nice and melted and warm,
I'm going to add that 1
teaspoon of black mustard seed.
Black mustard seed
is a pungent spice,
and it is also quite aromatic.
All right, so we
want to make sure
that that is not too hot,
because they have a tendency
to want to jump out of the ghee.
And combined with oil,
it could cause a burn
and make a little bit of a mess.
So what I'm going to do
is tilt it to the side.
And now you can see they're
beginning to pop a little bit.
They're starting to turn
a little bit of gray.
That's what you want to see.
And once again, my
temperature isn't too high.
Otherwise, they're going
to want to jump out a lot.
I'm just going to give
him another 10 seconds.
And while that's
going on there, I'm
going to go ahead and
grab my cumin seed.
Cumin is also a nice aromatic
spice, slightly pungent
and heating in nature, really
good for the digestive system,
increasing digestive powers.
It allows the absorption of the
healthy benefits of the split
mung bean and the basmati
rice to be easily assimilated
into your digestive tract.
So we're adding the
cumin seed there.
I'm going to do that same
thing, giving those a second.
I'm actually going to
turn that down even lower,
so they have some
more time there.
And while that's going
on, I'm going to chop up
this onion real quick.
So you don't need to chop it
up into super small pieces.
They can be nice sized chunks.
All right, really simple.
And that's perfect right there.
And then from here, now that
these have cooked nicely,
the cumin seed and the
black mustard seed, what
I'm going to add is my Hing.
And I'll use just the
spoon to measure it out.
Just a little bit.
You don't need a lot.
That right there is enough.
Add that to it.
You can smell it already.
It's super aromatic.
It has a little bit
of a sulfery smell.
And then these are
fresh curry leaves.
You can get these at your
local Indian grocery store.
And usually you'll have to
ask them where they are.
That's at least my experience.
All right, I'm going to
just pick off about four
or five of these and add them.
They'll pop too.
And then I'm going
to add-- if you
want to add a
little bit of spice
to this, especially for those
of you looking for some weight
reduction or removal
of kapha dosha, which
is going to be an excess of
earth and water in the body.
If you're experiencing
sluggishness
in your digestive tract
or bloating or water gain,
this is a nice little
addition right there.
And that's not going
to make it too hot.
So once those are
mixed in nicely--
and that looks perfect--
now I'm going to add my onion.
OK, and you know what?
That was a huge onion.
I'm just going to add
that much of the onion
and saute these in.
So while the onion
is sauteing, I'm
going to take my mung bean and
my rice once these are nice
and coated, I'm going to
take my mung beans and rice
and rinse them off
over at the sink.
So this is 1 cup of long
grain white basmati rice.
White basmati rice or long
grain white basmati rice
has a very low glycemic level.
So it's not going to
spike your sugar levels.
It's also very easy to digest.
Once they've taken the
hull-- and I know commonly
it's known that brown rice
is more nutritious for you.
Yes, it is.
But what we're
looking for here is
something that is really
easy for the digestive system
to process.
So that's why we're using
white long grain basmati rice.
And then this is
that split mung bean.
So 1 cup of each and then
we got to rinse them.
And use cold water.
And you want to make
sure you rinse this
until the water runs clear.
Massaging it a little
bit is perfectly fine.
And that looks good.
And then we're just going
to set it in the bowl.
Check on the onions.
And they're starting
to look like they're
getting translucent.
And it smells delicious.
All of those aromatic spices,
along with the curry leaves,
is starting to come
out of the pot.
My mouth is watering
just thinking about it.
So I've already pre-measured
out 5 cups of water.
And if you add
vegetables to it, you're
going to probably want to add
a little bit more water to it.
Great.
My onions are looking perfect.
I'm ready to add the split
mung bean and the rice
mixture to it.
And I'm just going
to stir that in
nicely real quick
before I add the water.
And once we cover
this pot, we're
not going to want
to stir this again.
OK, so now I'm going to
add the 5 cups of water.
And I'm going to turn it on
high just to get it going.
And then now to the
water, I'm going
to add the turmeric powder,
salt, and black pepper.
So we're going to measure out
1 teaspoon of turmeric powder.
And then salt and pepper is
going to be mainly to taste.
I'm using pink Himalayan salt.
It has a lot more mineral
content to it.
So I like to use this.
And I'm just going to put
in one nice big pinch, maybe
just a little bit more.
And then similarly
with the black pepper.
I'm going to put a nice
pinch of the black pepper.
This also has a really nice
digestive quality to it.
And then we'll throw in
4 whole cloves as well.
And then give it one last stir,
just to mix everything in.
And then well this
is coming to a boil,
I'm going to chop up some
fresh sliced fresh ginger
and then add that to it as well.
So this is looking
perfect right here.
I'm going to cover that, move
this onion aside, and then
slice some fresh ginger.
So the fresh ginger
root, I broke the fingers
apart earlier because
you want to wash
in between all of these.
It grows in the dirt.
It is a rhizome.
It is a tuber or a root.
And also really important to
buy organic ginger, especially
because it is a
tuber or it's a root,
so it tends to absorb
everything that's in the soil.
So really important to
buy organic ginger root.
And we all we want to do is
give it some nice thin slices.
Perfect.
So 1/4 cup, that's approximately
what it is, about a 2 inch
piece of ginger.
And I'm going to chop it
into some other small pieces.
That's going to cook down and
become nice and soft inside.
It's super fibrousy.
I don't tend to skin my ginger.
I tend to leave the skin on.
If you like it for some reason
you want to take the skin off,
that's perfectly fine as well.
All right, one last little stir.
And it is ready.
So all we're going
to do is cover this
and let it cook on
low for 15 minutes.
I'm noticing that
this burner is going
to be too much for
this to keep it on low.
We don't want to burn the
bottom or have it overflow.
So I'm going to switch it to the
back burner, put that on low,
and move these things
out of the way.
All right, beautiful.
So now, while that's cooking,
let's talk about kitchari.
Part of the reason why kitchari
is such a healing recipe
is in its simplicity.
What we have is basmati
rice and mung bean.
The two together make a nice
complete protein profile,
nine essential amino acids
present, along with turmeric,
cumin, and black mustard seed,
which are all digestive aids.
People who have
digestive issues,
this is a really
great go-to recipe.
A lot of the fiber inside of
the mung beans and the rice
is going to help clean
out the digestive tract.
The cumin seeds
and the turmeric is
going to help to heal any
inflammation inside of the GI
as well.
And any sort of
toxicity is going
to begin to get
removed by the cumin
seeds and the black
mustard seed as well.
Also, if you're experiencing
low energy levels,
this recipe can really help
to spark your digestive fire
and get your GI
tract back in order.
[CLOCK TICKING]
>> I think the kitchari
is ready to check out.
Let's look.
It's ready.
And let's see what's going--
oh, my gosh, it smells so good.
So I like to add some
things to the top of this.
And that would be fresh
cilantro, some freshly
green cut scallion, and a
little bit of lemon juice.
So let's go ahead and
put some in a bowl.
It looks amazing
and smells amazing.
I'm just going to add a little
bit more, because I'm hungry.
All right, a little bit of
fresh cilantro over the top.
And some freshly
chopped green scallion,
and a little bit of lemon juice
to add some sour flavor to it.
It smells so delicious.
I'm going to have
a little taste.
Let's see how it is.
Mm, so good.
We have two more cooking
videos in this Ayurveda series.
And both those recipes are
amazing toppings for kitchari.
So be sure to check
out Justine's spice
and chutney videos to
create a complete healing
ayurvedic meal.
Thanks so much for joining me.
Namaste.
>> Don't forget to explore the
rest of this series by watching
our docu series, yoga
practices, meditations,
and self-care videos.